The Project Gutenberg eBook of Behold this Dreamer
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

*** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook. Details Below. ***
***     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.      ***


Title: Behold this Dreamer

Author: Elizabeth Bartlett

Release date: October 30, 2018 [eBook #58207]

Language: English



*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEHOLD THIS DREAMER ***




Produced by Al Haines, produced from scans provided by Steven Bartlett









[Illustration: Cover art]




BEHOLD THIS DREAMER

Elizabeth Bartlett


_Behold This Dreamer_ was originally published in 1959 by Editorial Jus
in Mexico City, and is now out-of-print.  The authors literary
executor, Steven James Bartlett, has decided to make the book available
as an open access publication, freely available to readers through
Project Gutenberg under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-NoDerivs license, which allows anyone to
distribute this work without changes to its content, provided that both
the author and the original URL from which this work was obtained are
mentioned, that the contents of this work are not used for commercial
purposes or profit, and that this work will not be used without the
copyright holder's written permission in derivative works (i.e., you
may not alter, transform, or build upon this work without such
permission).  The full legal statement of this license may be found at:

http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/legalcode

[Illustration: Creative Commons logo]




_Behold this Dreamer_




_By_ ELIZABETH BARTLETT


BOOKS

  _poems of yes and no_
  _Behold this Dreamer_


POEMS

_Accent, American Weave, Approach, Arizona Quarterly, Beloit Poetry
Journal, Canadian Forum, Catholic World, Chelsea Review, Coastlines,
Commentary, Cresset, Epos, Fiddlehead, Folio, four quarters, Harper's,
Harper's Bazaar, Literary Review, Mexican Life, Naked Ear, New Mexico
Quarterly, New Poems 2, New Voices 2, N. Y. Herald Tribune, N. Y.
Times, Nimrod, Odyssey, Outposts, Personalist, Poetry Chapbook, Prairie
Schooner, Quixote, Saturday Review, Shenandoah Review, Southwest
Review, Sparrow, Step Ladder, Venture, Views, Western Review, Western
Humanities Review, Whetstone, Wisconsin Poetry._



Acknowledgements: Certain of the poems in this collection have appeared
in publications listed above.

The title, _Behold This Dreamer_, is taken from an anthology of that
name, in tribute to its author, Walter de la Mare (1873-1956).




  _Behold this Dreamer_



  _Elizabeth Bartlett_



  _Editorial Jus, S. A._
  _Mexico City_




  First Edition
  © 1959 Elizabeth Bartlett




_To_ CHARLOTTE HOWELL REED




CONTENTS

Vision

The poet's dream

Time will tell

Afternoon of a journey

The cave

The test

In his image

All this, before

The creation




  _Vision_

  EYE _center of the universe
  Whose pupil is the world
  Teach us to see the light
  Embracing night_

  _Between the sunset and the dawn
  To see the unicorn
  Within that crystal ball
  Of pure recall_

  _Where time is an iris mirror
  A pointillated blur
  Of image and of form
  Caught in its storm_

  _With every moment held inside
  The frame of canvas mind
  Forever captive, stilled,
  Motion fulfilled_

  _Where memory and dream evoke
  The future like a window
  Made of stained glass, one cast
  From the fractured past_

  _As retina and perspective
  For our darkness, the bridge
  Connecting what has been
  With things foreseen_

  _Through your bright lens, illuminate
  The galaxy that waits
  Invisible as trust
  In stars and dust_




  _The Poet's Dream_

  WHEN _the waters of the sun
  Fall on the flaming sea_

  _When the desert rose is one
  With the snow sipping bee_

  _All that our senses now shun
  Time's alchemy will free_

  _On the coral shores of night
  The ghosts of fish shall wake_

  _And offer incense to the light
  That gives them bread to break_

  _From the singing shells with wings
  An artist's eye shall peer_

  _With violin hands for strings
  And a poet's ear_

  _Then white silence like a nun
  Shall lift her long white sleeves_

  _And shake the treasures she has spun
  From dreams whose thread she weaves_

  _From the surf of mountain caves
  A billion stars shall gush_

  _And whirl on the windward waves
  Through the darkened hush_

  _In the valley of moon trees
  The glowing fruit shall sway_

  _And rise by twos and threes
  Above the cradled day_

  _On the jungle's peaceful floor
  Lion and deer shall meet_

  _A crucifix made of ore
  Between their kneeling feet_

  _All of this and more shall be
  Within that shining net_

  _When time redeems mortality
  From its mortal debt_

  _Then magnet age shall point its north
  Towards youth's eternal pole_

  _That alpha star in the fourth
  Dimension of the soul_

  _Where love curves back in heartspace
  Within its chrysalis_

  _And gravitates the imaged face
  Of the all creating this_

  _From the light years of the past
  The undeflected force_

  _Shall bind the future fast
  To God's own source_

  _As cause and word unending
  Repeat the rhythmic plan_

  _Of universe transcending
  Man's origin as man_




  _Time Will Tell_

  WHERE _fireflies are stars
  And the evening sky a sea,
  There you will find me, far
  From the leveling demands
  That leveled you and me._

  _When distant mountains bend
  Like deep swells toward the shore,
  Then you will see the ends
  For which I built my dikes
  Against the lowly roar._

  _Though breath was all I owned
  To force my heart to climb,
  Though words were all the stones
  I had to seal my mind,
  You will know why, in time._




  _Afternoon of a Journey_

  THERE _will never be another,
  That day was forever._

  _We dove through tropic noon
  Into a green sky.  The palms stood
  Quiet, still, their fronds
  Like swollen waves about
  To break, transparent, lime limned
  And streaked from base to rim
  With icy light._

  _Lungs gilled and arms finned wide,
  We slipped into the pale
  Of that dry sea, following downrays
  Until we reached the cool
  Of silence, a sandpaved lagoon
  Upholding its weight of time
  Under trees that climbed._

  _Perched on a log, we scanned
  The currents, the drifting shaft
  Of shadows, instinctively alert
  To armadillo's crawl, the stir
  Of something red,
  The eye of an iguana met...
  Ourselves.  Perceiving_

  _We were not alone in breathing,
  Being witness,
  As well as evidence
  In that primal air,
  How all of us shared
  In the serene of a sunless glow
  Which waterless flowed._

  _Gently, we moved along a path
  That opened as we passed,
  Whispering our affirmations
  To those secret ones
  Who flickered and flashed,
  Carrying our echoes back
  From near, then far, far off._

  _And slowly, the silence arced,
  Leaped high--and broke,
  With parrots in the undertow
  As the waves rolled over
  And the green tide flooded
  The forest floor, whirling,
  Swirling a world set free._

  _Now all of us were cells
  In a chemistry of shells
  Older than snails,
  Plankton or sunbaked clay,
  Fellow creatures in an afternoon
  As joyous as a long lost tune
  About to be remembered._

  _Oh all of us there
  In that drenched, tropic green
  Began to sing and sing,
  Shedding our ties
  With root and rock and sky,
  As we found our song
  In our living bond._

  _Pod and leaf, mouth and beak,
  Whatever lived and breathed
  That sudden afternoon,
  Sang wonder through the woods,
  As we heard and discovered
  Each in the other
  Without a word._

  _Until a metallic bird,
  On roaring wings,
  Crashed our song beneath
  The hammered surf,
  As it thundered,
  Like lightning in a storm,
  Fearfully born._

  _Then all of us
  Grew motionless
  In the sculptured undersea
  Of silenced green,
  Knowing, as we did again,
  The thing forbidden and forgotten
  In a world of men._

  _There will never be another,
  That day was forever._




  _The Cave_

  DROP _by drop
  The earth is born
  A billion years
  From dark to dawn_

  _Drop by drop
  As rivers flow
  Past sunless cliffs
  No wind has known_

  _Where no grass blows
  And no birds sing
  There time drips slow
  And patient clings_

  _Drop by drop
  Till waterfalls
  Are turned to stone_

  _Here new stars form
  And mountains rise
  Clear of the storms
  That twist the sky_

  _Drop by drop
  While caverns tall
  Carve crystal bones_

  _What dream lies walled
  Within this night
  What shape shall crawl
  Up to the light_

  _Drop by drop
  As silence grows
  Inside its vault
  Of carbon snow_

  _When glaciers halt
  Before no zones
  When both the poles
  At last are one_

  _Drop by drop
  The dawn shall come
  A billion years
  From cave to sun_




  _The Test_

  HE _who would climb the heights of tone
  And scale the peaks beyond the listening ear,
  Must first walk over water
  And learn to stand on air, alone._

  _He who would swim the waves of light
  And dive past shores into a sunless glow,
  Must first merge with his shadow
  And melt through solid glass, like night._

  _Where eyes are fins and sound is leap,
  The rhythmic force performs its own ballet;
  When dreams are fired in clay,
  They burn a path through timeless sleep._




  _In His Image_

  WHO _has not looked into the heart of night
    and seen the darker light,
    concealed like spectral stars
    beyond the rim of Mars,_

  _Who has not listened to the sound of mind
    and heard the silence wind,
    like rivers underground
    out to a sea profound,_

    _has only eyes and ears._

  _Who has not reached above the clouded span
    and touched the cosmic plan,
    upheld like spider's climb
    upon the spokes of time,_

  _Who has not followed the labyrinthine thread
    And crushed the monstrous dread,
    that other men may gleam
    the glory of the dream,_

    _has only hands and feet._

  _Who has not lived within his hour of space
    and etched it with his face,
    as portrait of the sun
    reflects the solar one,_

    _is only shape and dust._




  _All This, Before_

  I RACED, _I rushed, I ran,
  to catch the empty hand of time--
  Before the wind, the blowing wind,
  This breathless gift._

  _I willed, I worked, I wept,
  To melt the frozen face of time--
  Before the sun, the burning sun,
  This frenzied bone._

  _I drank, I danced, I dared,
  To tempt the stony foot of time--
  Before the rain, the driving rain,
  This raptured flame._

  _I leaped, I laughed, I loved,
  To ease the burdened heart of time--
  Before the dust, the settling dust,
  This flesh and blood._




  _The Creation_

  OUT _of the white and the blue
  Out of the mist and the ice
  Out of the wind and the flame
  The creature came._

  _With eyes as brilliant as the light
  With ears as lucid as the sound
  With feet as sudden as the thought
  The creature caught_

  _A breath from the yawning sky
  A drop from the nodding sea
  A root from the sleeping earth
  And from their birth_

  _Measured the length of the seasons
  Balanced the rhythm of the tides
  Secured the growing of the seed
  And woke the need_

  _Of the dream inside the egg
  Of the thirst within the cell
  Of the shape beneath the bone
  Then took a stone_

  _And breaking the silent void
  And loosing the swollen stream
  And cutting the golden thread
  The creature said:_

  _Here on this dot of bounded space
  Here in this point of moving time
  Here with this seal of life and death
  I fix my breath_

  _That all the works of my hands
  That all the passions of my heart
  That all the wonders of my brain
  Shall here remain._

  _I, Gilgamesh, Rama, Adam
  I, Phoenician, Saxon, Mayan
  I, Peasant, Leader, Architect
  By this reject_

  _Perpetual day or night
  Everlasting rain or drought
  Eternal struggle or peace
  Until words cease_

  _Between infinite men and gods
  Between partisan young and old
  Between ultimate right and wrong
  For each is strong._

  _Let calendar be as record
  Let monument be as witness
  Let history here determine
  Which shall win._

  _Then the sky hurled its lightning
  Then the sea roared its thunder
  Then the earth reared its fire
  To show their ire_

  _At the vanity of the ego
  At the rashness of the sower
  At the folly of the dreamer
  And redeemer_

  _Who would thus destroy the sun
  Who would thus defy the flood
  Who would thus pollute the air
  And showed him there_

  _The blinding vision of the truth
  The deafening echoes of the damned
  The crashing madness of the plan
  That he began._

  _And when he saw the faces
  And when he heard the weeping
  And when he knew the sickness
  That men possess_

  _As mortal children of ambition
  As transient strangers of desire
  As fatal victims of perfection
  Released by none_

  _From the essence of the grape
  From the music of the reed
  From the incense of the bowl
  The creature stole_

  _The power of forgetfulness
  The illusion of contentment
  The promise of exaltation
  Making them one_

  _That the lost and unfulfilled
  That the laughter and the pain
  That the glory and defeat
  Be complete_

  _Seeing how frail is the candle
  Hearing how brief is the song
  Knowing how soon is the temple
  Darkened and still._

  _Then slipped the root from his feet
  Then poured the sound from his ears
  Then blew the light from his eyes
  And went more wise_

  _Into the white and the blue
  Into the mist and the ice
  Into the wind and the flame
  The way he came._



[Editorial note: The author's literary executor discovered in Elizabeth
Bartlett's personal autographed hardbound copy of _Behold This Dreamer_
her own marginal notations relating to the next-to-the-last stanza of
the above poem, accompanied by her confirming handwritten revision of
that stanza. The stanza as printed here incorporates her revision.]




  _Behold This Dreamer_
  is a signed, limited edition
  designed by the author
  on Corsican rag paper
  in Baskerville type




ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Elizabeth Bartlett (1911-1994) was an American poet and writer noted
for her lyrical and symbolic poetry, creation of the new twelve-tone
form of poetry, founder of the international non-profit organization
Literary Olympics, Inc., and known as an author of fiction, essays,
reviews, translations, and as an editor. She is not to be confused with
the British poet (1924-2008) of the same name. For more detailed
information about her life, work, and critical commendations, see the
Wikipedia article
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elizabeth_Bartlett_%28American_poet%29.

Bartletts most notable achievements include:

* Creation of a new form of poetry, "the twelve-tone poem," adapting
Arnold Schonbergs musical system to the verbal, accented sounds of
language. Called "the Emily Dickinson of the 20th Century," her concise
lyrics have been praised by poets, musicians, and composers alike.

* Publication of 16 books of poetry, a group of edited anthologies, and
more than 1,000 poems, short stories, and essays published, for
example, in _Harpers_, _Virginia Quarterly_, _New York Times_, _North
American Review_, _Saturday Review_, _Prairie Schooner_, and in
numerous international collections.

* Recipient of many fellowships, grants and awards, including NEA, PEN
Syndicate, fellowships at the Huntington Hartford Foundation, Montalvo,
Yaddo, MacDowell, Dorland Mt. Colony and Ragdale, travel grants, and
honors for introducing literature as part of the Olympics.

* Founder of the Literary Olympics, to restore literature, specifically
poetry, as a vital part of the Olympics as it once had been in ancient
Greece.

Bartletts poetry came to the attention of leading poets, writers, and
critics as diverse as Marianne Moore, Wallace Stevens, Mark Van Doren,
Conrad Aiken, Allen Tate, Alfred Kreymborg, Robert Hillyer, Louis
Untermeyer, Rolfe Humphries, John Ciardi, Richard Eberhart, Richard
Wilbur, Maxine Kumin, Robert M. Hutchins, Kenneth Rexroth, William
Stafford, and others. Over the years, Bartlett maintained an active and
extensive correspondence with eminent poets, writers, and literary
critics; evident throughout this collected literary correspondence are
strong statements attesting to the importance of her work.

_Behold This Dreamer_ was published in Mexico City in 1959. By 1961,
Jonathan Williams wrote of the book: "Your language is cultivated,
employed consistently and lucidly. To my observation, it seems fair to
say that you belong with the best of your generation, which I would say
includes May Swenson, Denise Levertov, Garrigue, et al." Louis
Untermeyer added his voice: "I particularly like your fusion of
observation and whimsicality, as well as your avoidance of the poetic
stereotypes." Rolfe Humphries was intrigued by Bartletts poetic
techniques: "I enjoyed your poems and admire many...." About _Behold
This Dreamer_, Gustav Davidson wrote: "I enjoyed reading these poems.
I was impressed by their precision, clarity, and technical competence."
About the same work, critic Paul Jordan-Smith wrote: "Your poems were
begotten of a strong, imaginative sense.  My congratulations on this
beautiful collection."

Elizabeth Bartlett's husband, Paul Alexander Bartlett (19091990) was
an American writer, artist, and poet. He made a large-scale study of
more than 350 Mexican haciendas, published novels, short stories, and
poetry, and worked as a fine artist in a variety of media. For more
detailed information about his life and work, see the Wikipedia article
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Alexander_Bartlett .

Elizabeth Bartletts son, Steven James Bartlett (1945 ), is a
psychologist and philosopher who has published many books and articles
in the fields of philosophy and psychology. For more detailed
information about his life and work, see the Wikipedia article
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steven_James_Bartlett.











End of Project Gutenberg's Behold this Dreamer, by Elizabeth Bartlett



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEHOLD THIS DREAMER ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.
This particular work is one of the few individual works protected
by copyright law in the United States and most of the remainder of the
world, included in the Project Gutenberg collection with the
permission of the copyright holder. Information on the copyright owner
for this particular work and the terms of use imposed by the copyright
holder on this work are set forth at the beginning of this work.


1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


