The Project Gutenberg eBook of My Treasure
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: My Treasure

Editor: Thomas W. Handford

Illustrator: Kate Greenaway

Release date: May 1, 2011 [eBook #36005]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Chuck Greif, The Baldwin Library of Historical
        Children\'s Literature in the Department of Special
        Collections at the University of Florida\'s George A.
        Smathers Libraries and the Online Distributed Proofreading
        Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MY TREASURE ***




Produced by Chuck Greif, The Baldwin Library of Historical
Children\'s Literature in the Department of Special
Collections at the University of Florida\'s George A.
Smathers Libraries and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]

[Illustration: JUMBO BROKEN LOOSE.]




MY

TREASURE.

[Illustration]

EDITED BY

THOMAS W. HANDFORD,

("ELMO.")

CHICAGO AND NEW YORK.

BELFORD, CLARKE & CO.

1888.

COPYRIGHT,

BELFORD, CLARKE & CO.

1887.




CONTENTS.


                                                                    PAGE.
  A Queer Play-House                                                  50
  A Reckless Ride                                                      8
  At the Shore                                                        82
  Baby Ralph's Letter                                                 64
  Bell and her Pet Dog                                                42
  Belle and her Brothers                                              95
  Betty and Polly                                                     33
  Brave Hal                                                           80
  Dolly Knits, then Hides                                         70, 71
  Dot's New Friend                                                    78
  Frankie Minds Mamma                                                 58
  Going to Bed                                                        18
  Going to Boston                                                     67
  Hattie and the Butterfly                                            72
  Jane and Rob                                                    46, 47
  Little May's Pet                                                    36
  Little Mother Hubbard                                               84
  May and her Papa                                                    41
  Meg and Little Bell                                                 32
  Milk for Baby's Supper                                              30
  Moll and Jane's Picnic                                              94
  Mr. Fox is Sure                                                     68
  New Eyes                                                            86
  Old Charlie Runs                                                    90
  Only a Bird                                                         54
  Our Little Hand-Organ Man                                           66
  Playing at Soldiers                                             20, 21
  Polly and her Dead Bird                                             93
  Poor Joe                                                            60
  Rebie's New Home                                                    48
  Rose and the Little Beggar                                          88
  Sick Molly                                                          62
  The Disobedient Mouse                                           22, 23
  The Fishing-Boat Nancy                                              10
  The Gypsy Camp                                                      74
  The Pet Rabbit                                                      39
  The Shark                                                           26
  The Three Kittens                                               44, 45
  The Two Stags                                                       38
  Tom, Grace and Lou                                                  37
  Walter's Butterflies                                                76
  What a Kiss Did                                                     56
  Who is to Blame?                                                    52


  POETRY.

                                                                    Page.
  Baby Boy                                                            28
  Bertie and Rover                                                    24
  Cowslips                                                            16
  Doll and I                                                          40
  "Fly Little Bird Away"                                          34, 35
  May Day                                                             19
  My Treasure                                                          7
  "Out of the Wild Northeast                                          92
  Tad and the Lobster                                                 31
  The Blacksmith                                                      15
  The Disobedient Mouse                                           22, 23
  The Little Rill                                                     12
  The Robin                                                           14


  ILLUSTRATIONS.

  Jumbo Broken Loose                                       _Frontispiece._

                                                                    PAGE.
  A Queer Play-House                                                  51
  A Reckless Ride                                                      9
  At the Shore                                                        83
  Baby Boy                                                            28
  Baby Ralph's Letter                                                 65
  Bell and her Pet Dog                                                43
  Belle and her Brothers                                              95
  Bertie and Rover                                                    25
  Betty and Polly                                                     33
  Brave Hal                                                           81
  Cowslips                                                            17
  Doll and I                                                          40
  Dolly Knits, then Hides                                         70, 71
  Dot's New Friend                                                    79
  "Fly Little Bird Away"                                          34, 35
  Frankie Minds Mamma                                                 59
  Going to Bed                                                        18
  Going to Boston                                                     67
  Hattie and the Butterfly                                            73
  Jack and Jill                                                       29
  Jane and Rob                                                    46, 47
  Little May's Pet                                                    36
  Little Mother Hubbard                                               85
  May Day                                                             19
  May and her Papa                                                    41
  Meg and Little Bell                                                 32
  Milk for Baby's Supper                                              30
  Moll and Jane's Picnic                                              94
  Mr. Fox is Sure                                                     69
  My Treasure                                                          7
  New Eyes                                                            87
  Old Charlie Runs                                                    90
  Only a Bird                                                         55
  Our Little Hand-Organ Man                                           66
  "Out of the Wild Northeast"                                         91
  Playing at Soldiers                                             20, 21
  Polly and her Dead Bird                                             93
  Poor Joe                                                            61
  Rebie's New Home                                                    49
  Rose and the Little Beggar                                          89
  Sick Molly                                                          63
  Solid Comfort                                                       91
  Tad and the Lobster                                                 31
  The Blacksmith                                                      15
  The Disobedient Mouse                                           22, 23
  The Fishing-Boat Nancy                                              11
  The Gipsy Camp                                                      75
  The Little Rill                                                     13
  The Pet Rabbit                                                      39
  The Shark                                                           27
  The Three Kittens                                               44, 45
  The Two Stags                                                       38
  Tom, Grace and Lou                                                  37
  Walter's Butterflies                                                77
  What a Kiss Did                                                     57
  Who is to Blame?                                                    53




I WONDER, I WONDER.

MY TREASURE.

THOMAS W. HANDFORD.

    Bright with smiles and wreathed with flowers.
      Happy be thy morning hours;
      Cloudless skies above thy head,
      Fair the earth for thee to tread,
      Songs of birds thy path attend;--
      All the good that heaven can send,
      Crown with joy thy morning hours,
    Wreathed with smiles and bright with flowers.

[Illustration]




A RECKLESS RIDE.


Reckless Ina, she was called, because she did so many reckless things.
But her name was Ina Bradford. She had no brothers, so she used to tell
her father that she would be his boy. And it was no trial to Ina do
boy's work.

Dish-washing she particularly disliked. And as to sewing--why, she had
rather go ragged any time than sew up the rents in her dress.

The one thing that Ina enjoyed more than anything else in the world, was
riding on horseback. Her father kept several horses. And he was
perfectly willing she should use any of the farm horses whenever she
liked. But Black Jupiter she must never touch. He was a large,
high-spirited horse, very unsafe for a young girl. But oh! how Ina
longed to get on Jupiter's back.

One day when her father had gone away Ina resolved to try. She put
bridle and saddle on without trouble. But the moment Black Jupiter felt
her weight on his back, he started on a run up the street. At first Ina
thought it great fun, but by and by her arms ached so she could scarcely
hold the bridle. And when Jupiter jumped at the cackling of a goose, Ina
would have fallen if a strong, brave boy had not caught the bridle. Ina
did not care to ride Black Jupiter again.

[Illustration: A RECKLESS RIDE.]




THE FISHING BOAT NANCY.


Here is the fish-ing boat Nan-cy. But where is the fish-er-man? Oh! he
has gone up the beach to his house to see his wife and his lit-tle
daugh-ter. He was in a great hur-ry, for he did not wait to take down
his sails, but on-ly made the boat fast to an old pile.

The rea-son of his haste was that his lit-tle daugh-ter Bess is quite
ill. He had to go to sea this morn-ing, for he is a poor man, and must
work ev-er-y day, but when he left Bess was in a fe-ver. All day long he
has been ve-ry anx-ious. But now good news is wait-ing him. At four
o'clock the fe-ver left her, and she is much bet-ter, and is wait-ing
for her pa-pa to come in. How glad he will be! But he can-not stop long
now, on-ly just to give her a kiss, for the boat must be ta-ken care of,
and the fish that he has caught must be sent to mar-ket; so back he will
go, but he will work now with a light-er heart, for his fear is gone.

[Illustration: THE FISHING BOAT NANCY.]




THE LITTLE RILL.


    Drop by drop the lit-tle rill
      Feeds the lim-pid stream be-low,
    Gleam-ing, spark-ling down the hill,
      Till it joins the riv-er's flow.
               * * *
    Drop by drop the whole night long;
      Drop by drop the long night through,
    Sing-ing low and soft its song;
      Leaps the rill, in meas-ure true.
               * * *
    Drop by drop like gems of light,
      Danc-ing where the sun-beams play,
    Grows the stream-let clear and bright,
      Where the sweet ferns line the way.
               * * *
    Like a mol-ten sil-ver tide
      Led by fai-ries, here and there;
    Now by rug-ged moun-tain side;
      Now by pas-ture green and fair.

[Illustration: THE LITTLE RILL.]




THE ROBIN.


    LIT-TLE rob-in, wild bird,
    Sing-ing sweet and blithe,
    Care-less of Time's hour glass
    And his crook-ed scythe,
    Prod-i-gal of pleas-ure
    In a harm-less way,
    Greet-ing in the sun-shine
    This thy hol-i-day.

    When the or-phan chil-dren
    Wan-dered in the wood,
    We shall stillre-mem-ber
    Thou wert kind and good;
    As their cheeks grew pa-ler,
    And with tears were wet,
    Thou didst sprin-kle o'er them
    Man-y a vi-o-let.

    Cheer us in the au-tumn,
    When the rains be-gin,
    While the gay flow-ers with-er,
    And the woods grow thin.

[Illustration]




THE BLACKSMITH.


[Illustration]

    CLANG, cling, clang, cling!
    Bel-lows, you must roar; and, an-vil, you must ring;
    Ham-mer, you and I must work, for ding, dong, ding!
    Must dress my Kate and ba-by, and bread for us must bring.




COWSLIPS.


    Yel-low, yel-low cow-slip,
      Grow-ing in the grass,
    Thou dost bloom so bright-ly,
    Thou dost smell so sweet-ly,
    That the ve-ry cat-tle
      Light-ly o'er thee pass.
            * * *
    Yel-low, yel-low cow-slip,
      Chil-dren gath-er thee
    In the ear-ly sum-mer,
    In the dew-y morn-ing,
    When his nest be-side thee,
      Leaves the lark so free.
            * * *
    Yel-low, yel-low cow-slip,
      Shin-ing in the sun,
    When the tall grass mead-ows
    Yield un-to the mow-ers,
    Then thy life is end-ed,
      Pen-sive lit-tle one.

[Illustration: COWSLIPS.]




GOING TO BED.


[Illustration]

May and Kate and Lou and wee Tom-my have been sit-ting by the fire in
the nur-se-ry for the last hour look-ing through their books. But now
the books have all been put on the shelf and nurse has made them ready
for bed. Mam-ma has come up, as she al-ways does, to hear their pray-ers
and have a short chat with them af-ter they are tuck-ed up in their
cribs. The chat has to be short, for these lit-tle peo-ple fall a-sleep
in no time.




MAY DAY.


[Illustration]

    One day, all
    in the sweet
    spring weath-er,
    Two lit-tle folk
    went out to-geth-er.
    Oh the bright May-day!
    Sun was shin-ing,
    birds were
    sing-ing,
    Flow-ers bloom-ing,
    May-bells ring-ing!
      Oh the glad May-day!

    So they two went forth a May-ing,
    Laugh-ing, dan-cing, sing-ing, say-ing
      "Oh the bright May-day!
    What care we for moth-er's warn-ing?
    Who would bide at home this morn-ing?
      Oh the glad May-day!"




PLAYING AT SOLDIER.


[Illustration]

"SHOUL-DER arms!" said Dick. "For-ward, march!" If you had been in the
room next to the hall where the chil-dren were play-ing that rain-y day,
you would have thought that an ar-my was march-ing back and forth, they
made such a noise. Then, all at once, the noise stopped. "The ar-my will
lie down, and go to sleep for the night," said Dick. The ar-my lay down
to play sleep, and in a twin-kling it fell in-to a real sleep. Ev-er-y
man was in the land of Nod. Jane, who had been out to the barn for a
bas-ket of ap-ples, was so sur-prised at the sight, that three great red
ones fell out on the floor be-fore she could catch them. Just at that
mo-ment the boys' eyes o-pened, and they had the ap-ples in less than no
time.

[Illustration]




THE DISOBEDIENT MOUSE.


[Illustration]

    SAD is the tale
    I have to tell,
    Of what a lit-tle
    mouse be-fell.
    "My darl-ing child,"
    His moth-er said,
    "There are two things
    That you must dread.
    One is the mon-ster
    called a cat;
    And one a trap.
    Ne'er go
    near that,
    No mat-ter how the cheese may smell:
    You'll rue the day. Mark
    my words well."

    And mous-ey lis-tened to her say.
    Had he but heed-ed! Well-a-day!
    That ver-y night he smelled some cheese.
    Quoth he, "What o-dors sweet are these?
    I'll go and see: per-chance the cook
    Has dropped a bit. Here's for a look!"
    A-las! a-las! dear chil-dren all,
    He dis-o-beyed. Be-hold his fall.
    He saw the trap, with bits of cheese.
    "I'll on-ly take just one of these,--
    A sin-gle one, not an-y more."
    Click went the spring; down fell the door!

    How sleek looks puss-y! How well fed!
    Poor mous-ey's moth-er weeps in bed.

[Illustration]




BERTIE AND ROVER.


    "O Ro-ver! I love you,"
      Young Mas-ter Ber-tie said.
    To prove his words were true,
      He hugged the dog's rough head.
               * * *
    Ro-ver knew not one half
      His lit-tle mas-ter said;
    But when he heard him laugh,
      He quick-ly raised his head.
               * * *
    He loved to run a-bout
      A-mong the lambs and sheep,
    Which lay in groups a-bout,
      Ap-pa-rent-ly a-sleep.
               * * *
    He'd leap a five-barred gate,
      And then, with con-scious pride,
    For Bertie's com-ing wait
      Up-on the oth-er side.

[Illustration: BERTIE AND ROVER.]




THE SHARK.


What great fish is this? It is a shark. He is fast now, and the men will
soon have him up on the ship's deck, where they will make an end of him.

Sharks are ve-ry fierce. They are so large, too, that they can eat up a
man with-out a-ny trou-ble. In some parts of the world peo-ple nev-er
dare go in bath-ing, be-cause of them. You can see in the pic-ture what
great teeth they have. This fel-low has been at ma-ny a bad piece of
work, I have no doubt; but now all his pranks are at an end. He has
fol-lowed the ship mile af-ter mile to pick up a-ny scraps that were
thrown o-ver, and they have tast-ed so well, that when he saw a great
piece of pork come splash in-to the wa-ter, he swal-lowed it down
with-out stopping to think that there might be a hook in it. Then all at
once he found that he was fast. Strug-gle as hard as he could, it was of
no use; he was held fast.

[Illustration: THE SHARK.]




BABY BOY.


    "Ho! mas-ter ba-by boy.
    Where are you go-ing?
    Dark are the win-try skies:
    Soon 'twill be snow-ing.
    Back to the nur-se-ry,
    Where the fire's
    glow-ing."
         * * *
    "I doe back"--
    stamps his foot.

    "No! I are doe-ing
    Down to my busi-ness.
    A big boy I'm drow-ing.
    Just where my pa-pa does,
    Dat's where I'm doe-ing."




JACK AND JILL.


[Illustration]

[Illustration]

THESE are Jack and Jill. Do you not see their pail? They fill it with
salt wa-ter.

[Illustration]

"WHAT a sweet lit-tle lamb!" said May. "No: it is a wolf. I must run: he
will eat me."




MILK FOR BABY'S SUPPER.


"PLEASE, Mrs. Wright, moth-er would like to bor-row a cup of milk for
ba-by's sup-per. Our cow has strayed a-way, and Tom has gone to find
her."--"Of course she shall have it, Tom," said Mrs. Wright. "How is
ba-by?" Tom's lit-tle ba-by sis-ter had been ver-y ill, and they had all
been a-fraid that she would not live. But now she was much bet-ter. Tom
told Mrs. Wright this, and then ran home.

[Illustration]




TAD AND THE LOBSTER.


    THERE was a
    little lad
    Whose name was Tad,
    Down by the sea.
    "A-ha! a-ha" cried he:
    "A play-fellow I see,
    Com-ing to play
    with me."

    [Illustration]

    But soon he
    changed his cry:
    The tears came
    in his eye.
    "Let go!" he
    cried; "let go!
    You don't play
    fair, you know.
    O mam-my,
    quick! Boo-hoo!
    He'll bite my
    finger through!"

[Illustration]




MEG AND LITTLE BELL.


MEG and her lit-tle sis-ter Bell went for a walk in the mea-dow. A cow
came down to the brook to drink. Bell was pick-ing some flow-ers, and
did not see her un-til she was close up-on her. Then she gave a loud
cry, and ran to Meg, and clutched tight hold of her dress. Meg soon set
her fears to rest; and the cow looked on with wide o-pened eyes, as much
as to say, "What a fool-ish child this is! I give her milk ev-er-y day."

[Illustration]




BETTY AND POLLY.


BET-TY came to make a call on Pol-ly. So Pol-ly got out all her toys,
and put them on the floor in a great heap, and they each sat down
be-side them. Bet-ty liked best of all a stuffed rab-bit that squeaked
when you squeezed it; and she tucked it un-der her arm, and took it all
a-bout from room to room with her. Pol-ly at last, when she saw how much
she liked it, gave it to her for her ver-y own; and Bet-ty went home
hap-py, with the rabbit on her arms.

[Illustration]




"FLY LITTLE BIRD AWAY."

[Illustration]


    A LIT-TLE girl
    Read in her book,
    How a wick-ed boy
    A wild bird took
    From out its nest
    In the green-wood tree.
    A cap-tive now
    'Tis forced to be,
    And flut-ters its poor
      wings all day long,
    And beats the bars of its cage so strong.

    "Poor lit-tle bird!"
    She soft-ly cried;
    Then on her head
    Her hood she tied,
    Took down the cage
    Of her own bird,
    Opened the door,
    With joy-ous word.
    "Fly, lit-tle bird, a-way,"
      quoth she,
    "Back to your home in the green-wood tree."

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

    A-way, a-way,
    The glad bird flew,
    Far out of sight,
    In heav-ens blue.
    The wee girl watched
    With won-der-ing eye,
    Till it had fad-ed
    In the sky,
    Then sat her down, and cried, "Boo-hoo!
    My bird is gone! What shall I do?"

    Her pin-a-fore
    With tears was wet:
    "My bird a-gain,
    "I'll nev-er get."
    At last she raised
    Her weep-ing eye,
    And there at hand,
    What should she spy
    But bird-ie hop-ping in
      his door,
    Tired of his freedom,
      back once more.

[Illustration]




LITTLE MAY'S PET.

[Illustration]


"Come in, puss," said lit-tle May, "and you shall have a nice cup of
milk for your break-fast. And I will put a fresh rib-bon on your neck,
too." Puss walked in at once, for he was ve-ry hun-gry. For more than an
hour she had been watch-ing at a mouse-hole, but the mouse would not
come out and be caught. So at last she had grown tired of wait-ing.




TOM, GRACE AND LOU.


TOM and Grace and Lou had been down to the brook the day be-fore, and
had caught three frogs. They got one of pa-pa's old ci-gar box-es, and
lined it with leaves, and cut small holes in it, that the air might pass
in and out.

[Illustration]

The next morn-ing they o-pened the box, and put them on the grass: they
looked ver-y ill. "Let's take them back to the brook," said Lou. As soon
as the frogs saw the wa-ter, they jumped, and were seen no more.




THE TWO STAGS.

[Illustration]


HERE we are out in the wild woods. What a pret-ty lit-tle glade it is,
with a spring of fresh wa-ter in it! But see, there are two stags here,
fight-ing as if they were bit-ter foes. Their great wide-spread ant-lers
are locked in-to each oth-er's. It some-times hap-pens in these fights
that the ant-lers get so fast-ened to-geth-er that the stags can-not get
them a-part. Then they both die. This will show you how quar-rels of-ten
have ve-ry sad ends.




THE PET RABBIT.

[Illustration]


TOM and Grace hur-ried through their break-fast, and ran out to feed
their pet rab-bit. Grace did not ev-en wait to put on her hat. But, when
they came to the hutch, there was no rab-bit there.

"We must tell John to look for him," said Grace. "There he is! Let's
run." So they ran down the path to meet the gar-den-er's boy. John said
that he would look just as soon as he took the bas-ket of let-tuce to
the cook.




DOLL AND I.

[Illustration]


    "OH, dear! Oh, dear!
    'Tis al-most nine.
    The birds all sing,
    The sun does shine.
    Poor Doll and I
    To school must go:
    I don't see why,
    We hate it so.
    I hate those let-ters. They twist and turn.
    There's no use try-ing: I'll nev-er learn.
               * * *
    Hur-rah! hur-rah!
    At last it's two!
    I am so glad!
    What shall we do?
    Come, Doll, let's run.
    I'll nev-er go,
    When I get big,
    To school, I know;
    But ev-er-y min-ute of the day
    I'll spend just as I like, in play."

[Illustration]




MAY AND HER PA-PA.


PA-PA and mam-ma will soon have sup-per; for I see Jane bring-ing it in
on a tray. But, un-til they do, May is to ride a cock-horse on her
pa-pa's knee. Pa-pa goes to town to business ev-er-y day, and, when he
comes back, May and her sis-ter Fan run to meet him. They take his hat,
and bring his slip-pers, and put him in the big chair in front of the
fire; and then they climb up in-to his lap, and play with him. He
rath-er seems to like it.

[Illustration]




BELL AND HER PET DOG.


This dog's name is Puck, and a ve-ry wide-a-wake dog he is, as you may
see from the pic-ture. His mis-tress is a lit-tle girl named Bell, and
he is ve-ry fond of her. At night he sleeps coiled up at the foot of her
bed. Some-times when she wakes she finds him ly-ing on the pillow, with
his head close to her cheek, and one ve-ry cold night he man-aged to get
in bed un-der the clothes. He is a ve-ry clever dog. If you tell him to
beg, he will sit on his hind paws and wave his fore paws in the air. If
he is thirs-ty, he will bring his cup for you to fill it with wa-ter for
him.

The first time Bell ev-er saw her dog was in the street. He had lost his
mas-ter, and came to her for help. She could not find his home for him,
so she took him home with her, and there he has lived ev-er since. Now
he has for-got-ten his old mas-ter en-tire-ly, and cares for on-ly
Bell.

[Illustration: BELL AND HER PET DOG.]




THE THREE KITTENS.

[Illustration]


"MEW-MEW!" said two lit-tle wee black kit-tens. Grace stooped down, and
picked one of them up. "Mew!" it said, and then tried to play with the
neck-lace she had on. The oth-er kit-ten did not like this at all. She
pulled at Grace's dress with her small black paw. So then she was tak-en
up too, and both soon snug-gled down in Grace's lap, and went fast
a-sleep. But where was the mam-ma cat all this time? She had gone back
to the barn, where all her kit-tens were born, to bring an-oth-er one to
the house, to show her mis-tress what a fine fam-i-ly she had. She had
hard work to get in; for John, the man, had closed the doors. She
walked a-round the barn, and at the back she found a win-dow o-pen. Ned,
the don-key, had his head out of it; but she scram-bled in be-side him,
and took up an-oth-er kit-ten in her mouth, and ran back to the house
a-gain.

[Illustration]

When she reached it, she found that Jane had closed the front-door. She
mewed as loud as she could; but it was some time be-fore an-y one heard
her, and o-pened it. But at last she reached her mis-tress safe-ly with
her third child. She her-self was white, and so was one of the kit-tens.
The other two were as black as coals.

[Illustration]




JANE AND ROB.

[Illustration]


KATE was ver-y un-hap-py. She had left her best doll in the path in
front of the house the night be-fore; and some one had stepped on it in
the dark, and it was crushed in-to bits. So Kate was cry-ing; for poor
Ar-a-min-ta Jane was her pride and joy. Just then her broth-er Rob came
in. "Why, you poor lit-tle girl!" he said. "I am so sor-ry! If you will
come out with me, I will show you how to play crick-et; and you shall
use my new bat." Kate cheered up ver-y much at this, and ran to put on
her hat. Rob was so kind to her that she had a ver-y good time, and
for-got all a-bout Ar-a-min-ta Jane in the fun of the game.

[Illustration]




REBIE'S NEW HOME.


"IS she coming to-night, mamma?" asked Marion.

"Yes, dear, I think so. We shall know very soon now. Papa will be here
in about ten minutes."

Marion and Elvie Reade ran to the window. They were very anxious to see
this little cousin who was coming home with papa.

"Rebie'll be our new sister; won't she?" said Elvie.

"Yes. And papa said we must be real kind to her, for she hasn't any papa
or mamma now."

"Yes, we will. I guess--Oh! there's papa, now. And--oh! Marion! Rebie's
crying. Let's go kiss her."

Out ran the two little girls, while mamma stood in the doorway with
little Ernest, and aunt Maria stood on the steps.

Little Rebie couldn't help crying, yet she liked her new home for all
that. But her cousins kissed her so lovingly, that Rebie soon smiled
through her tears.

And when baby Ernest said, "Ernie love oo, tousin Rebie," she laughed a
soft little laugh. Then they thought Rebie wouldn't feel lonely any
more.

"I think your papa _most_ as good as my papa," Rebie whispered to Elvie
after they had gone to bed that night. Elvie thought him a _little_
better, but she was too polite to say so.

[Illustration: REBIE'S NEW HOME.]




A QUEER PLAY-HOUSE.


HARRY and little Violet thought it the very best play-house in the
world. And I don't think Gyp would have enjoyed any other half so well.
It was papa's big boat.

They could sit in it and see mamma when she came to the door of the
little house near by, where they lived. And they could watch papa as he
went out in his small boat, or dory, as he called it. Harry could see
him far out on the water by standing up on the side of the boat. Little
Violet was afraid to climb up so high.

Sometimes Harry and Violet took their dinner and ate it in the boat.
Then Gyp always shared it with them. He would sit beside them in the
boat, or perhaps lie on the sand and wait for Harry to throw him his
share bit by bit.

The children liked to make Gyp speak for his dinner. But best of all,
they liked to toss it up, and see Gyp spring and catch it in his mouth.

One day, when they were playing near the water, Violet's sun-bonnet blew
off, and a wave washed it out beyond her reach. Then Gyp was ready to
help his little mistress. He swam out, seized it in his mouth, and soon
laid it at Violet's feet. She was so glad she hugged him, wet as he was.
And he repaid her, by shaking himself and sprinkling her all over.

[Illustration: A QUEER PLAY HOUSE.]




WHO IS TO BLAME?


POOR little Carlos stood thinking. He did not know what to do. He wanted
to tell the truth, yet he didn't like to have mamma blame him for
breaking Sylvia's doll. And he didn't think he was all to blame either.
The butterfly and Dandy both helped, he thought.

This was the way it happened. A beautiful large butterfly came through
the open window into the dining-room, then flitted out into the hall.
Carlos and his dog Dandy gave chase. Once, in his eagerness, he stumbled
over Dandy. And in trying to escape a fall he knocked the doll to the
floor. There was the body in one place, the head in another. Why did
Sylvia leave it right in his way?

At last Carlos decided to do the best thing--go and tell mamma all about
it.

Mamma listened patiently. Then she told Carlos that it would have been
better not to try to catch the butterfly. The pretty thing would die if
he caught it and shut it up.

Mamma told Carlos that Sylvia was partly to blame for leaving her doll
in such a place. But Carlos must be more careful next time.

Carlos felt very happy as he ran out of doors with Dandy. And he thought
it the nicest way in the world, to go and tell mamma everything.

[Illustration: WHO IS TO BLAME?]




ONLY A BIRD.


CAN you see the old man behind his rows of cages? In them are many poor
little birds. They cannot fly about in the pure sweet air. The old man
sells them. That is the way he earns his money.

Then why does he look so displeased? The young man, with the empty cage
in his hand, has just bought a bird and laid the money on the counter.

The young man loves birds so well that he bought one on purpose to set
it free.

The old man is wishing he could get the bird and sell it again. He
thinks it foolish to throw away money. And he tells the young man so.

"Not thrown away, my friend," says the young man. "It is well spent if
it gives pleasure even to the smallest creature."

"'Twas only a bird," insists the old man.

"But God made the birds. And not one falls to the ground without his
notice. I think we shall have to give an account of the way we treat his
birds."

"Well, I wish I had that one again."

"And I wish I could open all these cages."

[Illustration: ONLY A BIRD.]




WHAT A KISS DID.


BABY Bell thought she could do just as she pleased everywhere, and with
everybody. And she generally did. She even trotted into Mrs. Burnett's,
a sad, lonely woman, who lived all alone by herself in the next house.

One day she came pattering into the room where Mrs. Burnett sat. She
clung to her dress. She looked up lovingly into the sad face. Then she
lisped forth,--

"_Miss Nett_, Baby Bell tiss you."

Then she put up her sweet lips to give a kiss. Who could resist such a
baby? Not even Mrs. Burnett. She took the child on her lap, and covered
her face with kisses and tears. Baby Bell looked on wonderingly.

When papa came for her she said, "_Miss Nett_ tryin', Baby Bell tiss her
lots."

Mrs. Burnett explained. "I lost a baby just her age. I felt since that I
had no one to love me. But Baby Bell loves me, I am sure. I hope she
will come often."

"As often as you and she wish," said papa.

"Baby Bell tum ev'y day--tum see _Miss Nett_. Baby Bell love _Miss
Nett_," added the baby, looking back over papa's shoulder.

[Illustration: WHAT A KISS DID.]




FRANKIE MINDS MAMMA.


UNCLE SOL was going to take a party of boys out in his boat. All had
scrambled in but one little fellow, the smallest of the party.

"Tumble in, Frankie," said Uncle Sol. But still Frankie hesitated.

"Don't you want to go?" asked the old sailor.

"Yes, sir," answered Frankie, slowly, "but mamma doesn't like to have me
go on the water."

"Why?"

"She's afraid since papa was drowned."

"Don't go, then, my boy. Don't worry your mother. She's had trouble
enough already;" and Uncle Sol began to push the boat out into the
water.

"Pooh! Come on!" shouted Horace, the tallest boy in the boat. "Your
mother'll never know. We'll keep dark."

"Don't you go to learnin' Frankie any bad ways," said Uncle Sol,
sternly. "Boys never come to much in the world unless they mind their
mother. I've always noticed that."

Horace sat down rather ashamed of his bold words. And little Frankie
looked at Uncle Sol gratefully, saying, "I know mama'll be glad to have
me come home:" and with a happy laugh he ran away from the boat.

[Illustration: FRANKIE MINDS MAMMA.]




POOR JOE.


"YOU may put on your coat now, Hugh, and take these things to Mrs.
Larry. You have barely time before school, you must hurry."

"Must I go this morning, mother, why can't I go to-night, or this noon?"

"There'll not be time at noon. And before night Joe may want some of
these things. You may do, however, just as you think you would like to
have Joe do, if he was in your place and you in his. Poor Joe needs
better food than his mother is able to buy. You wouldn't have him suffer
for the sake of skating, would you?"

Hugh thought a minute. At last he said, "I know if I was in Joe's place,
I should want somebody to bring me a heap of things. Guess I'll go,
mother."

His mother smiled to hear him whistle as he ran from the yard. Just
before school he rushed in.

"Say, mother, can I buy Joe some oranges? He's white--he's white as your
ruffled apron. I've fifty cents. I'll spend half for Joe."

Hugh's mother kissed him before she said yes. And her eyes filled with
glad tears as he ran out whistling more merrily than before.

[Illustration: POOR JOE.]




SICK MOLLY.


"GUESS I'll hurry home," said the rough miner when some of his mates
urged him to go to the saloon, "Molly'll miss me."

Nothing seemed so pleasant at night as to see his little Molly standing
in the doorway to greet him when he came home. But to-night she was not
in her usual place.

"Where's Molly?" he quickly asked, entering the kitchen. Before his wife
could speak, he saw Molly in her mother's arms with her eyes closed.

"What is it?" he asked, in a hushed voice.

"I--don't--know," sobbed the poor mother. "She complained--of being
tired. And she wanted--me to hold her. I've held her--nearly all day.
I'm _so_ glad--you've come, Jake. Do run for the doctor."

"Yes, I will;" and without another word he hurried to the village.

"Will she live?" were his first words after the doctor entered the
house.

"I hope so," was the cheery answer. "Put her feet in warm water as soon
as possible. And here is a powder for her. I'll come over in the
morning. Think she'll be better then."

To the miner's great delight, Molly's blue eyes opened the next morning.
But if he had gone to the saloon, it might have been different.

[Illustration: SICK MOLLY.]




BABY RALPH'S LETTER.


GOLDEN-HAIRED, blue-eyed, sweet-mouthed Baby Ralph lay, a cunning little
white heap, in his willow cradle.

While he slept, papa and mamma came softly into the room--dropped the
lightest and sweetest of kisses on the dear baby face, then stole
quietly out and away to the big city. Did Baby Ralph like this? You will
hardly think so when you read his letter. Here it is:

     "MY OWN PAPA AND MAMMA,--Does you want to hear 'bout me? You
     thinked I didn't know you runned way off and left your little baby
     boy all 'lone. But I did. And I waked up and cried--and cried. And
     Auntie May looked sober--and grandma looked sober--and grandpa
     whistled--and I cried hard. Then Auntie May put something in my
     bottle. 'Twas good, and I didn't cry. But Auntie May bringed water,
     and put some on my face, and I didn't like it. And I cried
     awful--so awful Auntie May stopped. Wish you's here, 'cause I don't
     feel good. If my papa and my mamma's here I'd feel gooder--wouldn't
     fuss any bit. Wish you's here, I do, to kiss your own

     BABY RALPH."

Did this bring Baby Ralph's papa and mamma? Yes, indeed. And they took
him and Auntie May back to the big city.

[Illustration: BABY RALPH'S LETTER.]




OUR LITTLE HAND-ORGAN MAN.


NEARER and nearer the sitting-room door came the patter of little feet.
And this queer song was heard over and over:

"Herbie--is--_organ_-hand man!"

Then in pranced our little three-year-old Herbie, his eyes bright, his
right hand going round and round to imitate the hand-organ man. Under
his left arm was a cricket.

[Illustration]

"Look here!" said papa, laughing heartily, "you've got the cart before
the horse. It's hand-organ, not organ-hand."
"Herbie--is--_organ_-hand-man!"

His eyes only shone the brighter as he persisted in his funny mistake.




GOING TO BOSTON.


"WHERE let's go to-day?" asked Elsie, as the three children ran out of
doors.

"Guess we'll go to Boston," answered Abe. And little Andy echoed,
"Boston--Boston to-day."

So all three ran to the trunk of a large tree, lying on the ground. Tip,
their dog, followed. They never went anywhere without Tip.

Andy held the whip, so he sat nearest the horse and drove. Careful Abe
sat next. He had to hold Andy for fear of a fall. Elsie had nothing else
to do so she held her hat up on a stick. "So folks'll see we're comin',"
she told Abe.

[Illustration]




MR. FOX IS SURE.


FOXES are very sly. If they want a tender chicken for dinner, they don't
walk into the poultry yard in broad daylight. Our Mr. Fox knows better
than that. He waits till all is still at night. Then he steals across
the yard, and peeps into the hen-house.

All is quiet, so he steps in. Now he stops a moment to listen. He wants
to be sure that the big dog asleep near the house isn't after him. He
hears nothing, so he looks around for the hens.

There they are, asleep on a high roost. Can he get them? His eyes shine.
His mouth waters. He must have one somehow.

He is careful not to make a bit of noise--the sly fellow.

Mr. Fox is sure he can get one now. He reaches up till his black nose
nearly touches the rooster's long tail-feathers.

He is all ready for a spring, when a rush and a loud barking is heard.
The dog has scented the fox. So, instead of getting a nice, fat chicken
for dinner, Mr. Fox has to run for his life. And the dog is close
behind. So close that Mr. Fox fears that he himself may make a dinner
for the dog. But he reaches his hole safely.

[Illustration: MR. FOX IS SURE.]




DOLLY KNITS, THEN HIDES.


CUNNING little Dolly often gets into mischief. She thinks she can do
just what grandma and mamma do. One day grandma fell asleep and her
knitting dropped to the floor.

[Illustration]

Dolly soon spied it, and the spectacles, too. She picked both up and
climbed into a big chair. Before beginning to knit she thought of
something else.

"Dess Dolly'll put on drandma's tean tap."

So she got the clean cap from the table, and climbed into the big chair
again. After putting on cap and spectacles, Dolly tried to knit. But she
only pulled the needles out, and tangled the yarn. And grandma was
stirring, too. What would she say to Dolly when she woke up?

[Illustration]

Dolly was afraid grandma wouldn't like it, so she slipped from the chair
and hid behind the clock.

"Where's my work?" asked grandma. "Has Dolly been here?"

"Dolly's done 'way," answered a voice behind the clock.




HATTIE AND THE BUTTERFLY.


LITTLE Hattie Vaughn was playing in the back yard, when she saw a
beautiful butterfly light on a clover blossom just outside the gate. She
wished she could catch it. So she opened the gate and walked softly the
butterfly.

Her hand was almost on it, when the butterfly rose lightly in the air
and sailed away toward the woods.

Hattie watched it. Soon it settled down on a wild lily the other side of
a rail fence. Hattie crawled through the fence and came close to the
pretty butterfly again.

But just as her hand came near, away it flew further into the woods.
Hattie followed. By and by she lost sight of the butterfly. She was
tired, and wanted to go home. But she did not know the way. She was
lost. She began to cry, and cried herself to sleep.

Brother Dick found her sleeping under a large tree. Dick and his father
had been looking for Hattie some time. He sat down beside her and
thought he would not wake her till his father came. But the moment his
father spoke, Hattie opened her eyes. She was not afraid with her father
and Dick near.

[Illustration: HATTIE AND THE BUTTERFLY.]




THE GYPSY CAMP.


THE camp was not near the village. It was near the woods. The Gypsies
chose the place because they could get plenty of dry brush to burn. And
there was a brook near by where they could get good water. Some of the
village children thought at first that it would be fine sport to live
so: never to go to school--never to learn lessons--never to dress up
clean--always run about as they pleased and where they pleased.

But after the Gypsies had been there a long time, they thought
differently. They saw the dirty, ragged children carrying big kettles of
water from the brook, or large bundles of brush from the woods. They
learned that the women and children did all the work. Perhaps the men
stole many of the things they had to eat. And one day when two or three
boys ventured into the camp, they saw, in one of the tents, a poor, sick
child lying on the bare ground. No one was near it.

They went to their pleasant, comfortable homes, feeling that it was
better to have a good father and mother to care for them, even if they
did send them to school and require them to learn lessons.

[Illustration: THE GIPSY]




WALTER'S BUTTERFLIES.


"AUNTIE," said Walter, "is't naughty to catch butterflies?"

"I think if I was a little boy, I'd rather see them flying about in the
sunshine, than shut up in a box or under a glass."

"But is't _wicked_ to kill them?" persisted Walter.

"I think if a little boy caught and killed them because he enjoyed
seeing them suffer, it would be very wrong. God made all the birds and
insects to be happy. He don't want us to treat them cruelly."

"But, auntie, there's a great big house in Boston, not far from papa's
house, and it's most full of dead birds, and spiders, and bugs, and
butterflies, and everything.

"Yes, Walter, I have been there. But the men who caught the birds and
insects did not kill them just for the sake of killing something. They
wished to learn all about the birds and insects in different countries."

"But, auntie," said Walter eagerly, "I saw some ladies when I was out
yesterday, with birds stuck in their hats. Guess they's wicked."

"Yes, Walter, it's wrong, I think, to kill the pretty little birds to
wear as ornaments. We should let them live as long as they will."

[Illustration: WALTER'S BUTTERFLIES.]




DOT'S NEW FRIEND.


DOT didn't care for such playthings as little girls generally liked. She
wanted to play out of doors with the boys. And poor little Dot's mother
didn't care where she played, if she was only out of her way so she
could get her washing along.

She was a poor washerwoman, and had to work very hard to get something
for her three children to eat. So Dot had full liberty to go and come as
she pleased. And it pleased her to play with her brothers. They
generally went out near the water.

One day Dot was digging in the sand with Ivan's little shovel. "Le's
have that," said Ivan. "I want to use it now."

"No. Dot wants it," replied the child stoutly.

"Well, you can't have it. So hand it along."

"Dot will have it," was her answer. Then she disappeared behind a large
boat. Ivan ran after her, and, like Dot, came near running against a
lady who sat on the sand with a book in her lap. She was talking to Dot.

"Le's have my shovel," interrupted Ivan.

"Give it to him, dear, and I will get you another," said the lady. Dot
was charmed by the gentle voice, and gave up the shovel without a word.
Dot saw the lady many times after that.

[Illustration: DOT'S NEW FRIEND.]




BRAVE HAL.


"HERE I am, all right, little mother! I'll save you all," said brave
Hal, as his head appeared at the window. He had been out to see how deep
the water was.

They were all alone in the old house by the river. Father was away, and
the water was rising fast. What should they do? All depended on little
Hal.

"I'll take Annie first, she's so afraid. And you hold baby till I get
the rest over."

It was but a short distance to higher ground, but he had to step
carefully. So it seemed a long time to the waiting mother before she saw
him again.

"Jamie this time, 'cause he's lame," Hal said when his wet face
appeared. "Then he can see to the little ones."

It was some trouble to get lame Jamie on Hal's back. But at last he too
was safe beside little Annie. Then Jesse and Lida were carried by the
same willing though tired arms.

"Now, mother, let me take the baby, and you follow me." The little
mother's face was pale, but she followed her brave boy, and soon they
were all safe. Even then it was some trouble to guide the little party
through the storm and darkness to the nearest neighbor. But Hal was
brave to the end.

[Illustration]




AT THE SHORE.


"EVERY one of us are here, Aunt Kate. Are you ready?"

"Yes, Lizzie, all ready. Just as soon as the boat comes we will start.
Where are the other girls?"

"Out with Dan."

"It's very kind of Azzie to amuse her little cousins so much. Agnes and
Dan would be lonely here without her, I fear. And Amy had rather stay
with Sister Azzie than any one else. That shows that Azzie is a good
sister. I'm afraid my niece, Lizzie, is the least bit selfish. She
doesn't like to help amuse her cousins very well."

Lizzie pouted a little. She preferred to talk with Aunt Kate. But she
wanted to please her aunt, so she resolved to follow her kind advice.

They had a pleasant sail in the boat. And it was delightful eating lunch
on the cliff which overlooked the bay. But best of all to Lizzie, was
the story which Aunt Kate told while they sat on the grass after lunch.
And Aunt Kate did not forget to say an encouraging word to Lizzie for
doing her part so well through the day.

[Illustration]




LITTLE MOTHER HUBBARD.


"I'M in here, Ruby," said Chester to his little sister, when he heard
her call his name. "Well, what now? You look like a little old woman."

"Pomp and I are going to take a walk."

"If you were only dressed in old clothes, and Pomp was poor instead of
sleek and fat, you would do for a Mother Hubbard. I guess if your
cupboard was almost bare, however, you'd share your last crust with
Pomp; wouldn't you, sis?"

"Of course, Chester, when Pomp saved my life when I was a baby."

"Why, Ruby, you seem only a big baby to me now. Or else you are the real
Mother Hubbard come to life again in a new style. Which is it--which
shall I call you, my big baby or my little Mother Hubbard?"

"Mother Hubbard, for I ain't a baby."

"Mother Hubbard it shall be then. Remember this, Ruby, when I'm miles
away. I hear the stage now. So give me a kiss before I go."

Ruby gave her brother many kisses, and then stood and waved her
handkerchief till he was out of sight. And then she sat down and cried a
little and talked a good deal to her old friend Pomp.

[Illustration]




NEW EYES.


"ONLY see my dolly's eyes," said Dell to her twin sister Dora. "Wish we
could get some new ones put it. Let's go and ask Mr. Thomas."

"Yes, we will. We'll go right off now." So Dora and Dell took their
dolls and went over to see Mr. Thomas. His paints and brushes we all out
of doors when pleasant. When a rainy day came they were under cover. But
they were not in a shop then. They were under a great boat.

It was a pleasant day when Dora and Dell took their dolls to be mended.
So they found Mr. Thomas sitting out of doors in his shirt sleeves. He
was an old sailor. He liked to be where he could see the water all the
time.

Mr. Thomas liked children, especially little girls, so he was very
willing to mend their dolls.

"What color do you want the eyes?" asked Mr. Thomas, after fixing in
some round beads.

"Blue," answered Dell.

"Mine blue, too," added Dora. "We always have everything just alike."

"There, now they can see just as well as ever."

"Thank you ever so much!" exclaimed both girls at once.

[Illustration]




ROSE AND THE LITTLE BEGGAR.


ROSE was out in the garden with mamma. Rose ran here and there,
gathering the prettiest flowers to make into a bouquet for her. Rose
thought her mamma the loveliest and best mamma in the world. Nothing was
too good for her.

"O Mamma!" she cried breathlessly, running up after a long absence,
"there's a poor girl--outside the fence--over by the rustic chair. She
looks as though she wanted--something. She won't speak--Oh! come and see
here, mamma!"

"Poor child! Perhaps she is hungry," said mamma, rising quickly.

They found the child still looking wistfully through the fence. "Would
you like something to eat?" asked mamma kindly.

The bareheaded and barefooted little girl looked up into the sweet face
a moment, then said timidly, "Please, lady, give me some flowers."

"I'll give her mine," whispered Rose.

With a hurried, "Thanks, lady," she took the flowers and ran swiftly
away before another question could be asked.

"I wish I knew where she lived," said Rose.

"I will inquire. We may be able to help her."

[Illustration: ROSE AND THE LITTLE BEGGAR.]




OLD CHARLIE RUNS.


SEE old Charlie run. Do you suppose he is afraid of the children or the
constables? You see old Charlie gets into mischief sometimes when papa
is away. He gets into the garden where there are a few young fruit
trees. Old Charlie likes apples and pears. So papa told Neddie he must
watch, and if old Charlie got into the garden he must drive him out.

[Illustration]

One day old Charlie thought he wouldn't mind such a little boy. Then
Neddie asked Bess and little Effie to help. Each took a cornstalk. How
old Charlie ran when he saw them coming.

[Illustration: SOLID COMFORT.]

    Out of the wild north-east
      The snow comes fly-ing;
    O-ver our chim-ney tops
      The wind goes sigh-ing.

[Illustration]

    Up, lag-gard birds, a-way,
      On swift wings go-ing,
    To where, on south-ern hills,
    A-far from win-ter's chills,
      Soft winds are blow-ing.




POLLY AND HER DEAD BIRD.


Some one gave lit-tle Pol-ly a bird. It sang all day long, and made the
nurs-er-y ring with its mer-ry notes. Pol-ly was so fond of it, and
al-ways fed it her-self. One day when the children had come in from a
walk, they found the bird dead in its cage. A wick-ed cat had killed it.
The chil-dren all cried a great deal; and they bur-ied it in a small
white box in the garden, and plant-ed flow-ers o-ver the grave.

[Illustration]




MOLL AND JANE'S PICNIC.

[Illustration]


Moll and Jane had a pic-nic. They first begged the cook to give them
some sand-wich-es and gin-ger-bread. Then Moll stole down stairs, and
got an a-pron-ful of po-ta-toes, while Jane got some match-es. They were
go-ing to roast their po-ta-toes; and this is the way they did it. They
dug a shal-low hole, put them in, cov-ered them with dirt, and then
built a fire a-bove them. They were ver-y good when they were cooked, I
can tell you.




BELLE AND HER BROTHERS.

[Illustration]


The same day that Moll and Jane had their pic-nic, Belle and her two
small broth-ers had one. They did not have a fire: but their cook put up
a much bet-ter lunch for them, and they took it to their fa-vor-ite
spot, packed in a bas-ket on their don-key's back; and, while they ate
their lunch, he nib-bled the soft grass. They had a good time, and were
not sent to bed without sup-per, as Moll and Jane were, for mak-ing a
fire when it was for-bid-den.

BOOKS MAKE THE BEST PRESENTS.

The Largest List of Popular Standard Works Published.

129 DIFFERENT VOLUMES BY THE BEST AUTHORS.

All printed from large, clear type, on good paper, very handsomely bound
in cloth, black and gold. Price per volume, 75 cents.

    Adam Bede. _George Eliot._
    Adventures Among the Indians. _Kingston._
    Admiral's Ward. _Mrs. Alexander._
    Æsop's Fables. Over 100 illustrations.
    Airy Fairy Lillian. "_The Duchess._"
    All in a Garden Fair. _Besant and Rice._
    Andersen's Fairy Tales.
    Arabian Nights' Entertainment.
    Arundel Motto (The). _Mary Cecil Hay._
    Belinda. _Broughton._
    Beyond Pardon. _Bertha M. Clay._
    Called Back and Dark Days. _Hugh Conway._
    Cardinal Sin (A). _Hugh Conway._
    Cast Up by the Sea. _Baker._
    Charles O'Malley. _Lever._
    Christmas Stories. _Dickens-Collins._
    Children of the Abbey. _Roche._
    Complete Letter Writer. _Handford._
    Cruise of the Black Prince. _Cameron._
    Daughter of Heth (A). _Black._
    Deep Down. _Ballantyne._
    Deerslayer. _Cooper._
    Dickens' Child's History of England.
    Dickens' Shorter Stories.
    Dickens' Story Teller.
    Doris. "_The Duchess._"
    Don Quixote. _Cervantes._
    Dora Thorne. _Bertha M. Clay._
    East Lynne. _Wood._
    Eight Years' Wanderings in Ceylon.
    Erling, the Bold. _Ballantyne._
    Ethan Brand. _Hawthorne._
    Felix Holt. _George Eliot._
    Fern Leaves. _Fanny Fern._
    Fire Brigade. _Ballantyne._
    Five Years Before the Mast. _Hazen._
    File 113. _Emile Gaboriau._
    For Lilias. _Rosa N. Carey._
    Guy Rivers. _Simms._
    Guy Mannering. _Scott._
    Green Pastures and Piccadilly. _Black._
    Grimm's Popular Tales.
    Gulliver's Travels and Baron Munchausen. _Swift and Raspe._
    Half Hours with Great Authors.
    Half Hours with Great Humorists.
    Half Hours with Great Novelists.
    Half Hours with Great Story Tellers.
    Handy Andy. _Lover._
    Harry Lorrequer. _Lever._
    Her Mother's Sin. _Bertha M. Clay._
    Hunting in the Great West. _Shields._
    Hyperion. _Longfellow._
    Imitation of Christ. _Thos. á Kempis._
    Ione Stewart. _Linton._
    Ishmaelite. _Braddon._
    Ivanhoe. _Scott._
    Jane Eyre. _Bronté._
    John Halifax, Gentleman. _Mulock._
    King Arthur. _By the Author of John Halifax._
    King Solomon's Mines. _Haggard._
    Ladies' Etiquette.
    Ladies' Family Physician. _Charusse_
    Last Days of Pompeii. _Bulwer._
    Ladies Lindores. _Oliphant._
    Lady Audley's Secret. _Miss M. E. Braddon._
    Last of the Mohicans. _Cooper._
    Madcap Violet. _Black._
    Mark Seaworth. _Kingston._
    Macleod of Dare. _Black._
    Margaret and Her Bridesmaids. _Julia Stretton._
    Maid of Athens. _McCarthy._
    Midshipman. _Kingston._
    Mill on the Floss. _George Eliot._
    Molly Bawn. "_The Duchess._"
    Mrs. Geoffrey. "_The Duchess._"
    Murders of the Rue Morgue. _Poe._
    Mysterious Island. _Verne._
    Old Myddleton's Money. _Mary Cecil Hay._
    Oliver Twist. _Dickens._
    Our Mutual Friend. _Dickens._
    Outre Mer. _Longfellow._
    Other People's Money. _Emile Gaboriau._
    Paul and Virginia, Rasselus and Vicar of Wakefield.
     _St. Pierre, Johnson and Goldsmith._
    Partisan (The). _Simms._
    Peter, the Whaler. _Kingston._
    Phantom Fortune. _Braddon._
    Phyllis. "_The Duchess._"
    Pilgrim's Progress. _Bunyan._
    Pilot. _Cooper._
    Red Eric. _Ballantyne._
    Rifle and Hound in Ceylon. _Baker._
    Robinson Crusoe. _DeFoe._
    Romola. _George Eliot._
    Round the World. _Kingston._
    Rob Roy. _Scott._
    Rory O'More. _Lover._
    Salt Water. _Kingston._
    Sartor Resartus. _Carlyle._
    Scottish Chiefs. _Porter._
    Scout (The). _Simms._
    Shadows and Sunbeams. _Fanny Fern._
    Shandon Bells. _Black._
    She. _Haggard._
    Sketch Book. _Irving._
    Spy. _Cooper._
    Stoddard's Readings and Recitations. _Stoddard._
    Strange Adventures of a Phaeton. _Black._
    Sunrise. _Black._
    Swiss Family Robinson. _Wyss Montolieu._
    Thaddeus of Warsaw. _Porter._
    That Beautiful Wretch. _Black._
    Three Feathers. _Black._
    Tom Brown at Oxford. _Hughes._
    Tom Brown's School Days at Rugby. _Hughes._
    Tom Cringle's Log. _Scott._
    Tour of the World in 80 Days. _Verne._
    20,000 Leagues Under the Sea. _Verne._
    Two on a Tower. _Hardy._
    To the Bitter End. _Braddon._
    Under Two Flags. _Ouida._
    Vanity Fair. _Thackeray._
    Waverly. _Scott._
    Wanda. _Ouida._
    Willy Reilly. _Carleton._
    Washington and Marion (Life of).
    Webster (Life of). _Banward._
    Woman's Temptation (A). _Bertha M. Clay._
    Young Foresters (The). _Kingston._
    Yolande. _Black._

Belford, Clarke & Co., Publishers, CHICAGO AND NEW YORK.


THE GEM OF THE JUVENILES.

"The attention devoted by authors, artists and publishers to the
production of bright, pure, instructive literature for the young, is one
of the most hopeful characteristics of our modern civilization." OLIVER
WENDELL HOLMES.

BELFORD'S ANNUAL.

1887-8.

An American Book for American Children.

EDITED BY

THOMAS W. HANDFORD

(ELMO)

THIS BOOK IS WORTHY A PLACE IN EVERY HOUSEHOLD IN AMERICA.

[Illustration]

Illustrated with 125 Original Drawings,

By TRUE W. WILLIAMS, PAUL JONES, KENDRICKS, VAUGHAN AND OTHERS.

With Elaborate Colored Frontispiece and Covers.

_FULL OF STORIES, SKETCHES, FABLES, FAIRY TALES, POEMS, ETC, ETC._

By LOUISA M. ALCOTT, OLIVE THORNE, W. K. FOBES, P. T. BARNUM, EUGENE
FIELD, LUCY LARCOM, HENRY WARD BEECHER, ELIZABETH STUART PHELPS, W. D.
HOWELLS, L. P. TOLSTOI, ELLA WHEELER WILCOX, EVA R. GREEN, ALICE CARY,
MRS. DON, ETC., ETC., ETC., ETC.

Large quarto, 256 pages. Size 8 x 10 1/4. Bound in Illuminated Covers in
eleven colors, and in extra English cloth, with handsome gold and ink
designs.

A CHARM FOR CHRISTMAS! A TREASURE ALL THE YEAR ROUND!

FOR SALE EVERYWHERE

CHICAGO. BELFORD, CLARKE & CO. NEW YORK.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MY TREASURE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


